and we are back here with a stellar
guest dr. Saddam Mukherjee I know that
everybody googles everybody these these
days shamelessly somebody called
somebody will start googling at the
other end so all of you know about him
so I will not spend more time reading up
his bio-data except to say he is he is
somebody who can multitask more than I
have seen anybody multitask to this
champion dr. he the units are winning
author he is a scientist but most
importantly the deeply reflective person
who is willing to push the boundaries
and who's willing to question his own
science all the time so the best
scientist is the one who questions their
own science there are other scientists
who think that anything that I have said
once will always remain the same but the
beauty of science is it always changes
so cidade thank you very much for being
here and Kiran I don't have to introduce
her to you if I have introduced Carol
anywhere in India but most of all in
Bangalore then I think I'll be accused
of wasting time and birth so Karen as I
said to you earlier she'll ask the
intelligent questions I will ask the
dumb questions the first one I lost
I've been tutored to ask this so it
might sound like an intelligent
intelligent question but that's because
somebody told me to opt it we can all
talk about cancer and we won't read your
first book and everybody is scared of
cancer so let me start the what's new
what's new right now is a cell in place
of a pain because you say that what if
you can cure a disease by using cured
the disease by using the cell instead of
the pill will you explain that anything
sure first of all thank you for having
me thanks as well we are undergoing in
cancer therapeutics we will talk about
cancer prevention and early detection
separately but in cancer treatment
we're undergoing a series of very
profound revolution
as you as you very well know for the
longest time the model for cancer
treatment was based on cell killing
drugs standard chemo therapies and this
was built upon surgery and radiation so
you really had three choices surgical
removal of the tumor radiation to kill
the cells and chemotherapy traditional
classical chemotherapy cell killing
chemotherapy to kill the cells that
paradigm began to evolve in the 1990s as
our community of cancer scientists began
to discover what the root causes of
cancer are what is the root cause of
cancer and we now know that the root
cause of cancer of course is mutations
or alterations in DNA alterations in
genes and genes usually that control the
division of cells but can also control
other factors such as how cells acquire
nutrients in order to divide and so
forth so once those were found there was
an attempt to find new medicines a new
class of medicines which were which
would strike at the Achilles heels of
cancer so these were also chemical
therapies but they were called targeted
therapies and they included not just
molecules like imatinib or Gleevec but
also antibodies such as Herceptin or
trastuzumab finally much much later as
these paradigms began to evolve we also
began to understand that cancers are
surveyed by the immune system by our own
immune systems and often we began to
understand that cancers grow in the
presence of an immune system often by
evading immuno surveillance and so the
the thought this was an old idea but had
been not been possible to really
incorporate into the cancer
pharmacopoeia was what if we could use
these immune cells or other cells just
as we use drugs to cure cancer what if
we could weaponize a cell an immune cell
and by weaponize I mean add to that sell
a virus that would educate that cell to
go and kill a cancer and thereby kill
the cancer cells and this whole idea
which was in its infancy in the early
2000s began to acquire a lot of
potential and now has become one of the
most interesting arenas of of cancer
research let me be clear not all cancers
have been amenable to this kind of
therapy so cellular therapy is really a
very broad term but it uses this idea
that you can use cells rather than pills
or or or small molecules or drugs as if
there were drugs and it could be of
course against cancer you can use the
immune system but it also incorporates
aspects that are not related to cancer
so for instance one part of my
laboratory we actually discovered really
by accident I should say we discovered
the stem cells that form cartilage they
were not known before cartilage and bone
so one one aspect of cellular therapy is
regenerative so could you replace
cartilage and you know very common
disease across the world particular
disease of women with an enormous burden
is osteoarthritis so we have a big now
study going on and trying to use these
cells again as pills we've been trying
to use pills or drugs to ameliorate
osteoarthritis now for decades and
really not gotten very far this would be
the first time that one uses cellular
therapies for regenerating for instance
needs that have degenerated you can use
cellular therapies to alter for instance
you can combine cellular therapies and
gene therapies to cure diseases such as
sickle cell anemia beta thalassemia and
other disease with a huge burden in in
in places like India so it is a very
broad term but it asks a very simple
question which is that the cell is a
living obviously a living thing can we
use that can we manipulate
that living thing in us in such a way
that it becomes a therapeutic entity and
if you can use that can you use that in
the context of not only cancer but also
other degenerative diseases so before we
go to current which cancers does this
bark on and yet in which cancers
important cancer it doesn't work so the
first cancer is that cell therapies were
used for were blood cancers leukemias
and lymphomas the very first successful
trials were all in blood cancers
I just recently profiled for the New
York probably the I think she was the
seventh patient an eight-year-old girl
named Emily Whitehead who had multiple
II relapsed with blood cancer and was
almost on the verge of dying but she is
now fifteen come as far as we know cured
he's being monitored very closely but as
far as we know cure so it works for
blood cancers more recently it has
worked for cancers such as lymphomas and
myeloma and other cancer with quite a
large disease burden in in in places
like India where it's not worked
effectively thus far is in the so-called
solid common solid cancers these would
include pancreatic cancer these would
include ovarian cancer and many others
lung cancer in these cancers they have
not been so effective these cellular
therapies and one of the most
interesting arenas of investigation is
why why is it that blood cancers are
responsive and why is it that these
solid tumors are not responsive and we
and others have actually spent some time
thinking about this question and trying
to rework our ideas and thinking you
know maybe we should try different cells
maybe we should try different
combination of modalities and there's
all sorts of ideas about how to get
these cell therapies to work in solid
tumors solid cancers lung cancer cancers
of the pancreas liver and so forth get
it you have to pay play double role
because you are also a science person by
is this all foreign to us in India or is
a bug going on in some of these fields
in India as well well I think there is a
lot of work going on in this whole area
of in you know on ecology and cell
biology but I would say that we need to
really catch up because the reason why
Sid and I decided that we needed to do
this and needed to basically leverage
Science and Technology and take it to
the next ready to do what if you can
just explain well needed to start a
company like what we are doing in India
really you need it's because it was very
apparent to us that both US and China
were the ones who were being you know
talked about in this one area of cell
therapy and as you just heard from said
that I think the fact that you have this
wonderful opportunity to look at cancer
therapy so differently I just felt we
can't be left out of it and with that in
mind knowing that we have such a huge
cancer burden in this country we had to
do something about it because these
therapies what Sid didn't talk about was
the present cost of actually delivering
these therapies in the Western world the
cost is absolutely unaffordable in a
life more like India it can cost
anywhere between 300 thousand to a
million dollars per patient
and that's not something even the West
can afford comfortably so I think it was
very apparent to us where when you have
these kind of you know almost miracle
therapies you know you just heard about
this young girl was almost cured today
and the fact that these were death
sentences up you know up until now and
the fact that you can actually then pull
them out of that death trap and you know
give them another life I think it is
just amazing what's happening and I
think it's important that for a country
like India we have the scientists we
science we have the clinicians we have
the whole ecosystem that can actually
deliver on this therapy so it was
important for someone to really make
something of this and and with the SIDS
help I said well if if you're willing to
help I'm willing to basically you know
partner you when delivering this therapy
to India well not by Indian standards at
an affordable cost base because you know
nothing is going to be considered
affordable in India but certainly we
want to bring down those kind of prices
I just talked about to a tenth of what
it costs in the West so I think that's a
huge task ahead for us but I think we
are very excited because what we did see
is that we do have the capability there
are lots of small groups around the
country doing work in this particular
cell therapy it's for us to now start
populating the country with more such
groups and we will be one very important
group was going to be really focused on
taking that living cells that living
drug into our patients but I do hope
this research in India is better
regulated then says stem cell research
because lots of freelance arrangements
came up there and people started
offering stem cell therapy just because
there was no regulation no absolutely I
think regulations have to be very very
well constructed formulated and you know
delivered because I think as you very
rightly said this is about something
about delivering a an altered cell back
into the body and it is delivered
through a lengthy virus so you have to
make very sure that that virus doesn't
go off target and starts replicating so
there's a lot of quality control it has
to be done under the strictest of GMP
conditions because you don't want what
is really good manufacturing practice
because you don't want any contamination
to be carried into the patient because
we are trying to cure a patient not
infect the page
with other things so I think it's a it's
a very complex
you know therapy it's a very challenging
therapy but then you know the outcome is
so compelling that we have to find a way
of delivering it to patients you ever
think something well I was saying you
know there was this
I just wanted to convey to an audience
how exciting it is because you forget
we're using you know we're using
technical terms here and there there's a
famous Asimov quote which says that the
best science is sometimes almost
indistinguishable from magic there is a
quality but let me just think about this
for a second of the status of medicine
in which we extract from the body living
cells weaponize them using Lee infect
those cells with a virus we grow those
living cells in an incubator so that
they expand several hundred fold and
then we can recollect those living cells
that we have now genetically manipulated
and put them back into the human body
and use that as a drug I mean just I
just imagine the excite imagine it
should it should really send chills up
your spine
compared to compare it to most
technologies so in terms of medical
science what breakthrough you compare
this with the discovery of insulin the
discovery of antibiotics the discovery
of bypass surgery well so you know the
certainly and I just wrote a piece about
this what's interesting is that this
this these therapies what what they're
most comparable with his bone marrow
transplantation
when bone marrow transplantation first
appeared in the 1970s and 1980s it was
also considered something completely
magical or kidney transplantation these
therapies sit in between what is the
procedure and the pharmaceutical they
are procedures that are pharmaceutics
and that's why it's very important to
considered proceeded in fact we
ourselves unlike the rogue stem cell
clinics we ourselves have gone to the
regulators and said said regulate us we
ourselves are going to the regulator's
and say inspect us because we want the
highest quality of we want the very
highest quality of product and there's a
there's a there's a danger of of being
of this being deregulated and so given
those circumstances we've ourselves gone
to the to every regulatory body and met
them and said look this is our plan
because this is not something that you
are selling off the shelf this is not a
brand yes this is not a brand and doctor
is writing and somebody displayed far
from it yeah far from it so for each one
you have to make this drug so you are in
the American environment which also
which allows great science but also
allows great superstition now we read
about the great anti-vaxxers business
going on in America people are dying of
measles now measles are back so how do
you how do you sustain this in such a
suspicious environment well look you
know in general the there has been there
have been so many conspiracy theories
and nonsensical theories around cancer
that you know you always have to battle
as it were the superstitions around
cancer treatment in general oh you know
it's a conspiracies etc etc but there
has never been in the United States or
for the matter elsewhere in the world a
lack of innovation and it takes time you
know you have to this is a this is an
active process it takes time to convince
people that this can be delivered safely
I was telling Karen the recently many
many if you might know this in the
course of the development of bone marrow
transplantation which by now has you
know cured several disease several blood
diseases including several leukemias
when the first
were were done 88 patients died it was
the 89th patient who lived and then
began to show long-term remissions so if
you're a doctor or if you are the public
you have to have trust in the process of
science such that you understand that
these patients died either because they
had a terminal illness or because the
treatment was not successful for what
reason what was the reason because
everything arises in medicine everything
arises as the consequence of the project
of reason you have to apply reason to
why you fail you have to apply a reason
to why you succeed you apply for apply
reason to when a patient gets a response
but then relapses all of these are if
they are done systematically build trust
and you know part of the problem I think
to be honest with the anti-vaxxer as a
medical community had become very
complacent about the success of vaccines
what we should have been doing is
telling people every year year after
year is that the reason your child is
not you know having horrible diseases
such as mumps measles and rubella among
other diseases polio is because we have
reinvented as humans we invented
mechanisms to prevent your child from
having these diseases instead it became
very routine you know you went to your
pediatricians office your pediatrician
gave you an injection said now go on
right but again I have to convince all
of you the excitement that that pervaded
the world when the first polio vaccine
was successful was just enormous you
know children in that in the summers in
the United States of course here when
when polio would sweep through the
through the country they couldn't leave
their houses for the entire vacation
they would be locked up in their houses
in Boston City Hospital you could there
was a ward in which there was basically
a line of of so-called ventilators
because in those days we didn't
have positive ventilators there were
negative interest these were steel
chambers which the children were put
into and the steel chambers would expand
and contract because they had paralyzed
the upper parts of their body during the
acute phase of the polio epidemic
imagine a row 2030 such incubators with
ten-year-old five-year-old children
sitting with the steel pieces moving so
that they could read and now imagine 10
years 15 years later after the
introduction of the vaccine those those
incubator you can't even find them you
can't even find a picture of them
so the idea around the entire anti wax
movement was that there was that the
nihilism was because I think we failed
to convey the excitement and the number
of lives saved in the process I know so
I'm of the generation that still carries
the marks of smallpox vaccine in India
now we have the fourth generation being
born yeah without the mark for the
smallpox vaccine yeah it's a minute
coming as I said these are incredible
inventions these are inventions that
have left their mark on human history
and to be complacent about them and
worse still to be do do not give the
scientists who put their you know blood
sweat and tears into this is really
doing a disservice to human innovation
we were talking today actually and I
said you know we were talking to you
about how to accelerate the pace of what
what we were doing and I just said in
science there is no five-day week and in
medicine there is no five-day week right
in medicine there's always been a
seven-day week we have invented a
five-day week because you want to take
as in journalism at least we pretended
to be that way exactly
so a so we so it's you know one question
was over how can we accelerate it
I said make five days into seven days
that's already you know you've already
gained gained two days of work and
that's this that is the fundamental
driving spirit of innovation
so cannot let me ask you a twin question
one what do you have to say for this
anti-vaxxer everybody knows who ain t
max Elsa these are very powerful lobbies
in America and very popular now which
are campaigning against vaccine that's
why measles are coming back now and
large parts of America so what do we
have to say to these people to fear
science and second science he said is 24
by 7 7 days a week and all that but how
do you then combine entrepreneurship and
science the right way because the moment
that happens then again at the popular
level people begin to get suspicious and
there's a profit motive or corporates
have gotten right so everybody starts
getting you to that Monsanto mindset so
how do you deal with this so first and
foremost I think like girls do not just
said I think you need to connect with
society I think science need to connect
with Society I think scientists NIP need
to basically use simple language to
communicate the marvels of science to
society and I think you know there are
umpteen X you know examples of
presenting to society why certain things
are very compelling I mean I think you
know we haven't done a good job about
communicating many things I think we go
through waves of fabulous innovations in
science in medicine and then we start
taking it for granted you know this
particular cell therapy I mean today we
are at the cutting edge right you know
in the early stages of this particular
cell therapy I mean in in the years
ahead I'm sure this will become standard
of care but I think every new innovation
whether it's a vaccine whether it's
bone-marrow transplant
whether it's a new drug I mean you know
if you look at the hypertensive drugs
you look at many many new drugs that
have been you know brought about
paradigm changes in in in the way we
treat diseases I think have you know
been very well appreciated
in the early entry times but then later
they become part of life then you know
people then start sort of becoming
complacent and you know you have these
kind of anti-vaxxers and things like
that so I think it's about communication
it's about celebrating the miracles of
vaccination which we haven't done
properly I mean even if you look at the
HPV vaccines today this is very
important story the post in India which
can do so much and yet you have people
you know sort of creating all kinds of
controversies around it's my bad things
can protect women young women from
cervical cancer for life and especially
in a country like India Lobby the number
of the incidence of cervical cancer in
India is enormous you know mafia and and
as you know there was an in not only not
only were the vaccinators people who
were advancing the vaccine often thrown
out of places there were a couple of
people who were killed was it not yeah
but but there is a great deal of now
kind of Swadeshi opposition also talk
about India a conspiracy to bring in one
more sort of corporate product into
India so what you say about
communication is great and that's why
say that you are so valuable because you
are now making this you are idiot
proofing it for people like us otherwise
and these days every patient is a doctor
people go to a doctor doctor doesn't
touch the patient the doctor doesn't
feel poke you nothing doctor looks at
the scans prescribe something by the
time he or she is reading the
prescription patient is googling side
effects right that's what happens so so
it's very important that you be here
about cutting-edge research in a manner
that we can understand just add one more
thing in this particular case you're
talking about terminally ill patients
right they have no hope left this is
giving them the greatest hope and you
know you're seeing these wonderful
wonderful outcomes in many many patients
and another thing I
also want to tell you is that everything
there is a risk
nothing is risk-free and I want people
to understand that yeah
because justice said that said when you
when you started bone-marrow transplants
it was the 89th bone-marrow transplant
that was successful and you we must
understand that even in waxing you know
simple things like back vaccinations
you know people some people react very
very when you synagro so anything can
still be fatal absolutely I mean I think
qualify can be fatal in great the rarest
of rare cases otherwise somebody will
take out five seconds Shaco gupta said
but i think what is important is any new
therapy is inherently risky and
therefore we want to do it very
carefully in a very informed way and we
must you know protect ourselves in every
possible way in terms of making sure
that it is as safe as it as it can be
and as efficacious as it can be so
that's why i think it is important for
us to remember that this is not a simple
drug this is a complex therapy if at the
birth of cellular therapy in the united
states and in europe was also marked by
the by many deaths the FT had to shut
down certain certain trials and had to
examine them the important thing is is
of course if you the legacy of science
is a legacy of failure and that legacy
the only reason science works is by
examining that failure instead of
incriminating it and that's very
important because if you examine the
failures rather than incriminating it of
course they're frauds and there there
are examples in which the appropriate
measures were not taken but when the
appropriate when the approach of
appropriate risk mitigating measures
have been put in place and there's a
failure the the there is a the the
center the core of innovation is to
examine failure
rather than incriminate it and you know
if you do the opposite if the culture
becomes turns into one of incrimination
then all innovation dies what innovation
and where which culture of innovation
has been a risk free culture risk is the
center of innovation mitigated risk is
the is is the job of scientists and
doctors we spend hours and hours and
hours of our time thinking before acting
and this is part of the reason that this
you know complex therapies were born
here on the second part of the question
you then marry entrepreneurship with
this earth because ultimately everything
has to scale up to scale up it has to
build their economics the moment you do
that you run into this wall of suspicion
and then you come in to public public
health care and private health care and
who can afford what equity is equity in
health care has now become a global
issue I think in America it's going to
be a big issue in this election an
enormous issue you know going ahead
so how do you deal with that so as I
said you know for India the model had to
be affordable access as much as we could
do but what is interesting about the
Union is we've created for the first
time in the country social capital we've
created philanthropy a combination of
philanthropic capital and risk capital
how are you Danny
so the investors in omim Union have been
philanthropists have also been VCS who
have given this capital to us and I
think it's a very very interesting model
because remember if a pharmaceutical
company had to actually go about
starting and you know developing this
particular cell therapy to take it to
patients I think the upfront investment
costs were going to be so huge that I
don't think shareholders would have been
comfortable with taking that kind of
risk if you looked at even a hospital
trying to do it as a service they can't
because this is too complex
or therapy right so therefore it had to
be done through creating a fund which
was going to be able to do everything we
could in the shortest possible time you
don't want to take too much time because
you are to catch up so part of a part of
the fund is philanthropic contributions
yes so we have raised the initial
startup capital
it is a startup I mean for the first
time again after many many years I've
started my next startup after 40 years
so it's a very exciting process for me
as well but the interesting thing is
this is a very interesting start up
because it's about accelerating the you
know the the therapy from the cell to
the to the patient and I think that is
very exciting because we've got a bunch
of you know scientists and others who
want to really be a part of this journey
and I think the investors also are very
excited about being part of this very
exciting journey because this will put
India on the map of cell therapy if we
hadn't done this you would have just had
a few groups tinkering around here and
there but you would not have got to cell
therapy get to patients and make that
difference can I think that's very very
important so we are people I mean I at
least know I've had this experience I've
basically know what it takes to
commercialize such there if not this
particular therapy but certainly I've
taken risks I know what it takes to take
this to patients and I think therefore
everyone was engaged with this mission
is on a very very noble mission of
bringing new cell therapies to patients
in India well Karen just given me the
cue to do a little bit of self-promotion
just as she said she's doing a start-up
after 40 years now another startup I
have said I will start up after being a
journey for 40 years so people do check
out the print and do subscribe and do
read and like she says she's trying to
build as economics I am also trying to
build an economics around
journalism in India fair and corrects
your in Desmond India with the belief
that there is no contradiction between
good journalism and the marketplace
having said that now we have to come to
question right hi mom have you please
introduce your card for card
my name is drunk I do ki
Barcelona taki Cambre me up navigator
please see me sure 20 up later
so basically sir I won't ask more more -
Kiran mom so recently that book came
about about the generate routes the
issues with the generator I'll drop the
bottle of the the bottle of lies so what
has gone wrong in the Indian pharma
industry what do you think it was only
company that was not that that came
clean in that book was yours and other
most of the other companies were named
in that book so what has gone wrong and
what can you elaborate more on that I
guess it's sensational
it sells copies but I really don't think
I want to comment too much on that I
think what that book tells you is how
important it is to make sure that you
follow the right processes and
especially for a therapy like this it's
very very important that there are no
shortcuts later thank you so much did
you want to add something no
doctor took this chin up I'm a
practicing pediatrician for the last 40
years and much of what you have said is
40 years yeah actually I've actually
handled polio babies with iron lungs for
a long time when I was a student well as
a convention it's a that mentioned that
it's not seen any longer I'd only one
question which I wanted to ask both of
them what would be their ethical
challenges in introducing therapy like
this compared the West compared to our
country because in our country if you
look at the HPV trial which was done the
basic problem was the ethical challenges
because it was a challenge which was
done with very bad informed consent and
in a vulnerable population so I think
those are going to be challenges when
you are going to introduce a new therapy
like this well you know in the templates
for informed consent are already very
complex they're especially complex in
pediatric cancers because usually the
child doesn't give consent it's the
parents who are giving consent the
capacity of any of this going wrong and
in any phase for instance being
contaminated or not having a QC release
not being able to release it because of
quality control so you give the cells we
process them but at the end of it
nothing comes out because the code
doesn't pass the quality control this is
a complex idea to convey to the parents
of a child that along a child himself or
herself how much hope do you give to a
child with acute lymphoblastic leukemia
who's going to have this therapy how do
you explain the fact that maybe in this
particular case they did not reach a
remission what if they relapse
afterwards so the ethical challenges are
very much the challenges of medicine the
standard challenges of medicine
appropriate consent not using this on
populations that don't understand the
complexity of the challenge and and yet
on the other hand making it accessible
you don't want to create a barrier to
access just because you can't explain
complexity of their off day of the
entire system they are quite large they
are actually not specific to India
they're quite wide we will use the best
best available practices consenting as
you know consenting a child with acute
lymphoblastic leukaemia who's two years
old - what would amount to two full
years of chemotherapy including
potentially therapy that's injected into
your spine is not easy either how does
that child understand that they're going
to be that for two years they're going
to be confined basically confined to an
IV pole and with the possibility of you
know of getting painful injections into
their spine but those challenges are
universal we will try our very best to
try to address these ethical challenges
some of the challenges are a unique two
cell therapies these include the
possibility which has which has been
noticed that sometimes these cell
therapies are so active that they create
their own problems not only are they
good drugs they're too good drugs in
fact one of the reasons that the FDA
halted one series of trials the first
see one of the C's of trials is that
patients were dying not because the
drugs were in ineffective they were
dying because the drugs were so
effective at killing the cancer that as
the cancers were melting away in these
children and adults the the the body
couldn't handle the consequences of the
attack on that immune attack on cancer
the the the body imagined as if this was
an immune attack on itself because of
course the cancer is part of the part of
the body so all of these challenges have
to be handled the appropriate consent
forms and the appropriate regulatory
forms have to be handled correctly and
therefore also the trials that need to
be conducted have to be very carefully
conducted in India it's a big challenge
now because of the suspicions of the
past yeah but I think slowly I think
we'll realize what a disservice they've
done to innovation by banning clinical
trials to begin with so I think so the
government is now beginning to divide
this whole or they are not reverse gate
band the band still remains well I think
it's the way you interpret it I think
they do allow you to carry out clinical
trial at night they are still very very
nervous about first in human trials and
then they have this strange logic that
if it's a median Indian drug you can try
it but if it's a foreign drug there's a
lot of xenophobia about clinical trials
so I don't see some of it is of course
the history of the colonial experience
you know you don't want to and in fact
in the United States the history of
using African Americans as as trial
subjects without appropriate consent the
famous they you know there of course
there is a there is a rich but can go
too far absolutely can go too far the
appropriate balance is always the fine
point for for innovate before we take
that question let me ask you again an
idiot-proof in question you say that you
take these cells from the body and you
vaporize them you make them nice guys
you give them nice nice guys you
recognize them you you give them the
sniper rifles good kill the bad guys so
first of all before you insert them back
into the body what mechanisms do you
have to see that to make sure that they
have the right weapon and to that they
have the right intentions so can they go
inside the body and change their mind or
can they become double agents you know
body filled with Mata Hari right so as I
said I told you I gave you one one
extraordinarily important component of
this is the so called release criteria
so this therapy because once it's inside
you can't mess with it well you can
there are many ways once they're inside
to quieten them down in fact that is the
basis and unless you have someone with
experience you don't know how to how to
silence these cells if they go rogue as
but all of this said the first step the
first question you asked is that there
are ways very stringent criteria by
which the cells are released and this is
also true by the way for stem cell
therapies and should be true for true
stem cell therapies bone marrow
transplantation is a stem cell therapy
and before reom planting before
implanting a bone marrow you have to do
a thousand things to confirm that you
have the right yield that you have the
right cells that the cells have come
from a right donor that they will not be
a mismatch or etc etc etc by analogy by
this by the way the same thing is true
for any transplantation so by analogy
there are a whole set of release
criteria and if the release criteria are
not met and the product is not released
the second fact is that there are all
sorts of medicines that are now
available that allow us to dampen the
immune response if it goes haywire
because these weaponized cells are of
course can be quite dangerous so the
success of the study depends on again
the use of the use of medicine and here
is where we convert from the science of
medicine to the art of medicine the
clinicians who have given who give these
therapies have to be trained in the art
of medicine which may be that you make a
decision based on based on very
fine-tuned ideas about you know as the
is the balance out of control is the
immune system now this weaponized immune
system is it acting up in the wrong
direction should we dampen it to what
extent when should we take off those
dampeners again this is the art of
medicine and this of course requires
someone who's quite practiced
it's called cytokine release syndrome
where your body and your immune system
goes hyper but there you know that's why
you need a good clinician to actually
dampen it and the science of medicine an
art of medicine is the fascinating point
we'll come back to that question
yes a little bit louder no it's working
right yeah yeah it's no no it is yeah hi
Ravi Narayan
I run a software company I had a
software company here in India so I'm a
novice to most of the life sciences but
I have a question and this is - you know
Karen mentioned that there is risk and
everything and that is true but as a
discerning member of the public I think
we owe it to ourselves to assess and
quantify risk in any decisions that we
take so to that end I have a question
about I have a few questions about how
how do we quantify risk so for example
is this some is this a therapy that's
been FDA approved and secondly what is
the hit rate of the success rate of
patients I heard one example but are
there numbers to quantify success rate
as it is today I guess it's in the u.s.
it doesn't sound like it's been
introduced into India yet and to build
on what Shekar had mentioned earlier how
targeted is it so we know that cancer
cells the current therapies on cancer
cells are not very targeted so radiation
or chemotherapy definitely affects the
good cells as well and leaves you a
pretty impoverished at the end even if
you succeed in fighting the cancer
so how targeted and how selective is
this therapy so three questions I guess
thank you
the first point is that two such drugs
this year it is likely to approve two or
three further such drugs
the success rate depends on the
particular drug so they range from in
just to give you some range or some
sense of what the range might be in
multiple myeloma first of all remember
almost always we talk about risk
mitigation virtually all these trials
have been run on patients who have
worked terminally ill so their chances
of death are virtually a hundred percent
they approach between 90 to 100 percent
so to give you Emily whiteheads Emily
whiteheads case in the absence of car
t-cell therapy t-cell therapy her
mortality rate would have was a hundred
percent she had failed or gone through
two attempted bone-marrow transplants
and both of them had not worked she was
now in full-blown leukemic phase I'm so
Hamid ality rate was 100% so therefore
the risk mitigation becomes quite
extreme because you are facing the
possibility of a mortality rate of 100%
in an eight-year-old child 2 versus
whatever experimental viewers of course
an experimental subject so just to give
you a sense of what those numbers look
like in multiple myeloma now with the
new drug that will almost certainly be
approved by the FDA
you take patients with again mortality
rates in the 90 80 percent and about 80%
will achieve a remission which is
already a big step and off that 80
percent on the order of 50 or 60 percent
so give or take about 50 percent in
total of people who had a hundred
percent mortality rate are alive at two
to three years now this is a continuing
process two to three years is already
quite a large period of time so and some
of them have been alive now for five six
years we saw this paradigm evolve when
the first targeted therapies also came
around
that's over time we got more and more
comfortable with them the one key thing
one key factor is you have to realize
that cancer is a first of all is an
evolutionary disease in the sense it
follows the laws of evolution and
natural selection you know it is like
watching
Darwin's Galapagos Island in a perverse
form inside your body because the cancer
cells are constantly evolving your body
is constantly evolving in response to it
so therefore any therapy for cancer is
really a mathematical game
a mathematical game between the cancer
and and and and you so when you use when
you apply any therapy in cancer it
really depends on the numbers if you're
trying to use the therapy to kill one
billion cells then it means that 1
billion cells have the opportunity to
become resistant and therefore cause
relapse if you use the same therapy on
one thousand cells then you have only
one thousand possibilities that the
cells will become resistant and relapse
finding the right point as it were
between the one thousand cells and the
one billion cells where the risk is
exactly appropriate where the risk
becomes because all therapy scary risk
where the risk becomes appropriately
mitigated is of course an extremely
important question and the only way we
can answer that question is using
science is using reasonable non
anecdotal evidence and that's why we
undergo clinical trials and try to find
the so-called sweet spot in which you
apply the therapy which has toxic
consequences and it's expensive to the
right kind of patient and we've done
this over and over and over again in the
history of cancer I just want to say
that look I think you know cancer is
such a disease that you have to keep
innovating you have to keep trying new
treatments I think any cancer patient
will know that the the moment they are
not responding to one drug they want to
try something else so this is one
disease that needs constant innovation
and I think we mustn't forget that so I
think when you keep on looking at that
mathematical question of risk and you
know show me that this is going to work
and I'll show me that I'm not taking a
risk
I don't think cancer patients ask that
kind of question
I think cancer patients want hope cancer
patients want to try any new
experimental drug that will save them I
think that's what it's about so those
who talked about this tussle between the
body and the cancer cells or did or the
treatment of cancer cells your new book
is gene
do cells or gene also have does it gene
or a cell have a mind of its own no nor
is it a bot it's neither a bot nor does
it have a mind of its own it's and you
know these are obviously living elements
so it doesn't change its mind it just
mutates physically mind is a is it is
its own unique thing but cells are
living things and as living things
they're malleable they have the capacity
the most important capacity is that they
have they have adaptability and
evolutionary adaptability by
adaptability it means that they can
change their internal software which is
and and once they change their internal
software they can use that change in the
internal software to live in different
environments to do different things
that's the change in the software and if
you want to continue that analogy they
can also change their internal hardware
which would be their genes the DNA and
thereby become altered so a cell could
be imagined I mean you know this was of
course the a very insightful idea that
was brought into biology from physics a
cell is really a correlated version of
information you can think of cells in
many different ways but a cell is an
information processing machine it is a
living machine but is an information
processing machine it takes in
information from the environment and it
puts out information to the environment
now as I said there's a software
component to it the cell can we adapt
the software of internal software and
change itself so that it can now operate
in different ways and in certain
circumstances it can change its internal
hardware that would be that would be
genes mutate that hardware and then
acquire different characteristics hi my
name is by Rho V and that was thank you
for a very fascinating forget it what
you do tell it by Ruby and what do you
do so I'm an entrepreneur in the field
of health care and I think this is a
very fascinating and important
discussion that we need to have but I
write to come back to other thing that
you mentioned
earlier which is you know the importance
of effective communication and if you
consider the fact that in India we see
many more cases of advanced disease as
compared to you know early stage illness
and also if you consider the continuum
of cancer care the problem really begins
at the at the beginning which is you
know prevention and screening so I just
wondered what your thoughts were about
you know effective strategies for
overcoming sort of the stigma associated
with screening for cancer and how we can
address that problem in a in an
effective way in both the urban and
rural populations yeah I mean so I mean
to be very very clear if you wanted to
have if you wanted to have public health
impact in virtually every disease the
public health impact has occurred from
prevention and not so and not from other
modalities so the primary effort of
offer of the off seeing a public health
response in cancer will come from cancer
prevention it's really a pyramid and one
should imagine the pyramid carefully and
think about the pyramid carefully the
bottom of the pyramid is prevention
cancer prevention and over the years
usually that task has been taken over by
governments that is thus that is best
assigned to governments because they
have the capacity to change the social
milieu as it were such that you can in
advance cancer prevention campaigns our
government has done in the Indian
government is done quite a poor job for
instance in tobacco control which would
be a simple mathematical ISM of cancer
prevention we gave a couple of other
examples
human papillomavirus vaccination would
be a would be an example in which you
could potentially eradicate cervical
cancer or tobacco control program would
reduce the risk of lung cancer by
factors of 10 fold or 20 fold as we've
seen in the United States and other
places so that is the base of the
pyramid the second layer of the pyramid
is early detection as you're talking
about finding cancer in its early phases
and there usually there is a
I would say a public and private
partnership that works effectively the
problem in with cancer prevention early
detection is that our mechanisms of
early detection of cancer are still in
their infancy so aside from a few
cancers which we can name breast cancer
through mammography colon cancer through
colorectal cancers through colonoscopy
and other screening methods and two or
three others we really don't have very
effective cancer screening mechanisms
early cancer detection mechanisms and
that's a problem because as I said if
it's a numbers game then the earlier you
detect the cancer and apply the therapy
whatever the therapy might be then of
course the better the outcomes are so
here is this is an area that is rich
extremely rich for investigation and
there have been a number of groups that
have deepened their investigation into
how to do this prevention and early
detection in fact our group itself has
changed one part of our group has
focused now on metabolism and diet which
we hadn't really which way did not
before we had a big paper out in nature
which is widely covered in which we use
diet and chemotherapy in combination for
cancer therapeutics the final phase of
the pyramid as it were is cancer
treatment and if you look at cell
therapy that's the pinnacle of that
final phase because of the complexity of
the treatment but you have to remember
that all of this is part of the
ecosystem of cancer you learn about
cancer prevention from cancer treatment
you learn about cancer treatment from
cancer prevention this all forms a kind
of ecosystem and when it's successful
you can see you can begin to see public
health impact on cancer you know not not
to the satisfaction of everybody this is
a disease that we all dread but
certainly in places like the United
States cancer specific mortality has
decreased by about one to two to three
percent every year since there has been
decreasing since I would say since the
1950s and that's been a real that's been
a success story you might say one to two
percent a year is not that great but
cumulated across 20 30 years you get a
20 30 percent decrease in certain
cancers some cancers have been very
resistant to being amenable to therapy
pancreatic cancer being one of them
gall bladder cancers being one of them
liver cancers and so forth have been
very resistant others such as breast
cancer transport transformation we are
now seeing 30 40 year survivors of
breast cancer we are seeing Daniel
survivors of metastatic breast cancer
breast cancer that spread outside the
best we are seeing 10-year survivors of
metastatic colorectal cancer cancer that
spread outside the colon or the rectum
so in some cases the effect has been
transformative we are seeing 40 year
survivors 50 are survivors of childhood
leukemia so it really varies but but the
effect has been present and and there in
in most cancers hi my name is Sujata I'm
a trained a monologist and I haven't
practiced in the last 12 years but I've
just written a book on preventive health
and my question is about Ayurveda since
you're doing this trial in India and I'm
sure it's not part of the plan right now
but is there a plan to use Ayurvedic
medicine as at John 30 to support the
side effects that can be explained I
don't know if you have such a plan I
mean right now we're in in the you know
right now and we're in the infancy where
we're making lentivirus in in sterile
containers and infusing them into
t-cells how we how we ultimately deploy
these therapies and use adjunct
therapies to palliate and
to palliate symptoms and for symptom
relief is aid is it is certainly a
downstream consideration but right now
we're in the thickets of the woods as
they say we're in the thickets of the
woods I our conversations are around you
know how many particles of lentivirus I
go are you going to use Purcell where is
this cell going to be grown and what are
the quality control release factors that
will allow us you know should we do flow
cytometry or qPCR to figure out whether
the virus has gotten into the cell or
not so your questions are very relevant
to patients but right now whereas it's
as it were we are in the middle of the
thickets of the woods and we'll your
questions will become relevant once we
have the first patients that we've given
therapy to let me ask you a question and
the other side of the same question to
you what do you find if you were had a
choice would you be an entrepreneur or
would you be a researcher in the same
field well I think entrepreneur and who
invest invest some time in news media
startups all do have to choose between
being an entrepreneur and a researcher
well you can say you can pick both yeah
well I sort of have to take both one of
the life cycles I have to say that for
it the particular person that or the
particular niche that I inhabit is a so
called translational researcher this was
an idea dreamt of in the 1950s that
someone would have to take all these
astonishing ideas that were emerging
from the science of biology and apply
them and make human medicines so there
would be a translator between one and
the other and if you'd imagine medicine
as
relay race the baton would be passed
from basic science to people like me and
then would be passed on from me to
clinicians who would then deploy the
medicines into humans
there is no greater joy that one can
experience as a translational researcher
than to see a medicine that you have
dreamt up one morning that you made a
diagram of one morning you woke up one
morning and you wrote down on a sheet of
paper this is going to be a medicine a
human medicine to watch that human
medicine come alive and treat a human
being there is no greater joy and I
would say I would make the argument
there is no greater joy that anyone can
experience period you cannot experience
this joy unless you've done it yourself
you have taken you have applied you've
taken the the you've taken the benefits
of reason the the the great that the
great revolution that was handed to us
from the Renaissance all the way you've
taken that idea put it down on a piece
of paper drawn a diagram brought it to a
laboratory and made a human medicine out
of it and watched a human being being
cured of a lethal or a non lethal
disease I would say there is no greater
joy you cannot feel the shivers with any
other form of any other form of activity
there's nothing else that that compares
it's like it is like the highest it is
like a kind of it is like feeling a kind
of it is the highest high that you can
feel and you cannot imagine I can't even
convey to you as we make medicines I've
now made several several are in trials
several are in I cannot convey to you
the quality of the joy but we can feel
it if we can feel it in your voice yes
now I know that we are running out of
time but I can't not have a question
from and they are amazed Sandia is our
science editor we have a very strong and
very extensive science section she runs
it from Bangalore my question is in
terms of both the current political
climate in the US
as well as for the Cancer Research
community what is the scientific
consensus and also your personal opinion
on the use of marijuana and CBD to work
with the side effects of cancer
treatment well as you know I mean you
know the u.s. is going through some
important internal reflection about the
use of both marijuana and CBD CBD has to
be evaluated properly the effectiveness
of CBD has to be valid properly the use
of marijuana in palliative care has been
established but whether it should be you
know how to regulate it
how appropriately to regulate it has
been a big concern as you as you very
well know recently there were 450 odd
cases in which the vaping of whether it
was marijuana or marijuana laced
products or other products have caused
lung diseases so every time you every
time you open up the channels for for
the use of for the use of a substance
like marijuana you have the you have to
pay very careful consequences and the
CDC has been following this as Center
for Disease Control has been following
this very carefully so we'll see how it
turns out CBD is under evaluation so we
don't know yet so you have any closing
comments before we go this is a very
exciting phase for all of us at immunity
secondly I think in cancer therapy
itself I think we are at the cutting
edge and it's great to be you know
bringing that to India and I think we
need to really make sure that people
support this kind of research both in
the laboratories and in industry and I
think that's extremely important and you
are still hoping that clinical trials
that the rules relax a bit more well I'm
very confident that it will relax it has
to happen so thank you very much it's
been a great conversation I know this
can go on but this is Bangalore you also
need three hours to reach home
so we let you go but you know just a
thought as you go away just think about
all the treatments that we take for
granted today and just think them or
Google when was the first time such a
thing happened I can tell you a simple
thing like a laparoscopic surgery on a
torn ligament of the knee
it didn't happen until 35 years ago the
first heart bypass for just over 40
years ago yeah just over 40 years ago
anybody over 50 right now in India does
not carry those two small pox or three
small pox scars that my generation does
so then some things when a breakthrough
comes it scales up really fast and it
scales up so fast that after a while you
forget but it happened and I'll give you
a real-life experience I have a tough
time this is my this is the anniversary
of the 65 or etcetera etcetera so
history comes back and now with this
government a lot of the history is being
revised so how did Lal Bahadur Shastri
die but if he had a heart attack why
could they have done to him in Tashkent
all the stuff that we do this do these
days for heart attack to tell people
there was nothing for a heart attack in
1966 there was no bypass there was no
NGO I'm not even sure there were proper
ECGs at that time because we all now
take it all for granted so I think this
also this is a new idea I think very few
people have it but then it's Cales up
then the economies of scale will build
up and I think you might be looking at
one more miracle and I hope both of you
are right and wish you want this ship
all success
[Applause]
you let me make from IFL just come in
for a quick felicitations and our team
picture our team is just five officers
meeting Jesus see I spared you the flow
thing to the camera VG's off yeah sure